# RegEvol

RegEvol is a computational framework for detecting directional selection in regulatory sequences through phenotypic predictions and phenotype-to-fitness models. This ongoing project aims to identify signatures of positive selection acting on transcription factor binding sites across mammals and drosophila, using both statistical and evolutionary approaches.

---

## Project Overview
The pipeline includes the following key steps:

### Regulatory Data Processing
- **TF ChIP-seq Peak Calling**: Extraction and processing of transcription factor binding sites from publicly available ChIP-seq datasets in mammals and drosophila.
- **Homologous Sequence Retrieval**: Identification of orthologous regulatory regions using whole-genome alignments from the Zoonomia Consortium.

### Predictive Modelling
- **gkm-SVM Training**: Training of gapped k-mer support vector machine (gkm-SVM) models on species-specific regulatory sequences to predict binding affinity changes.

### Positive Selection Detection
- **Permutation Test**: Application of the method from [Liu & Robinson-Rechavi, 2020](https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/sciadv.abc9863) to detect extreme change in binding affinity.
- **RegEvol Test**: A novel maximum likelihood-based test to infer evolutionary regimes of regulatory regions from predicted binding affinity shifts.

### Comparative and Functional Analyses
- **Simulations**: Sequence evolution simulations under controlled parameters to validate the performance and robustness of selection detection methods.
- **Conservation Metrics**: Comparison of selection signals with evolutionary conservation scores (phastCons and phyloP).
- **Functional Enrichment**: Gene Ontology enrichment analysis of genes associated with positively selected regulatory regions.
- **Divergence vs. Polymorphism**: Integration of interspecies divergence and intraspecies polymorphism data to interpret evolutionary dynamics.
---
## Repository structure

```
├── 1_chipseq/                    # Scripts to run nf-core ChIP-seq pipeline
│   ├── run.nextflow.sh           # Main wrapper script
│   └── logs/                     # Logs generated by pipeline runs
│
├── 2_selection_tests/            # Scripts and Snakemake workflow for RegEvol and Permutation tests 
│   ├── Snakemake/                # Snakefile and workflow rules
│   ├── envs/                     # Conda environment YAML files
│   └── scripts/                  # Python/R scripts used by the workflow
│
├── 3_analysis/                   # Scripts for downstream analyses and figures
│
├── config/                       # Global configuration files
│
├── docs/                         # ChiP-seq samples description and download files
│
└── README.md                     # Project documentation
```
---
## Requirements

Before running the pipelines, ensure the following tools are installed on your system:

- **[Conda / Mamba](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)** – for managing environments and dependencies.
- **[Singularity](https://sylabs.io/docs/)** – required to use Docker/Singularity containers in Snakemake rules.

This workflow also depends on:

- **[Snakemake](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/)** : to run the RegEvol pipeline (version 7.24.0 was used in development).
- **[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/)** : to run the ChIP-seq peaks calling pipeline (version 22.10 was used in development).

### Option 1: Use your existing installation  
If you already have **Snakemake** and **Nextflow** installed on your system, you can skip creating the bundled environment and run the workflow directly.

### Option 2: Create the provided environment  
If you don’t, you can create the environment with:
```bash
mamba env create -f config/workflows.yaml
```

---

## Usage

### 1. Run the ChIP calling pipeline (Nextflow)

The workflow uses the [nf-core/chipseq](https://nf-co.re/chipseq) (2.1.0) Nextflow pipeline to process ChIP-seq data. 

#### Required inputs
The pipeline requires the following three input files:

1. **Reference genome sequence** (FASTA format)  
   → Located in `../data/genome_sequences/<species>/`.

2. **Sample sheet** (CSV format)  
   → Describes the FASTQ files, sample groups, and metadata (see the [nf-core/chipseq sample sheet](https://nf-co.re/chipseq/usage#samplesheet-input) specification).  
   → Located in `../docs/ChIP-seq/<species>/<sample>_samples_input.csv`.

3. **Annotations** (GTF or GFF file)  
   → Located in `../data/genome_sequences/<species>/`.

#### Data download
If FASTQ files are not already present in `../data/ChIP-seq/<species>/<sample>/`, the pipeline will automatically download them using the list of URLs provided in: `docs/ChIP-seq/<sp>/DL_<sample>.txt`


#### Run
```bash
./1_chipseq/run.nextflow.sh --sp <species> --sample <sample> [options]
```

Required arguments:
- --sp → species name (must match those in config/params.sh)
- --sample → sample name (used for result subfolders)

Optional arguments (can be passed in any order using --option value):
- --threads → number of threads to allocate (default: 1)
- --peaksType → "Narrow" for transcription factors, "Broad" for histone marks (default: "Narrow")
- --system → Execution mode: local or SLURM (default: "local")
- --container → Container type: "conda" or "singularity" (default: "conda")
- --resume → "resume" to resume a previous run, "false" to start fresh (default: "false")
- --skip → "true" to skip SPP and MultiQC steps, "false" to run all steps (default: "false")
- --help → display usage and exit

Example:
```bash
./1_chipseq/run.nextflow.sh --sp human --sample Wilson --threads 16 --system SLURM --container singularity
```

### 2. Run the RegEvol pipeline (Snakemake)

#### Required inputs
The pipeline requires the following three input files:

1. **Whole Genome Alignment** (maf.gz format)  
   → Located in `../data/genome_alignments/<species>/`  
   → Containing sequences of the species of interest aligned with an ancestral state. The name of the Ancestral state is defined by anc_name in config/params.sh.

2. **Peaks coordinates** (BED format)  
   → Located in `../results/peaks/<species>/<sample>/<TF>.peaks.bed`  
   → This file is automatically generated if the above ChIP calling pipeline was used

3. **BSgenome object** (tar.gz format)  
   → Used by 2_selection_tests/scripts/generate_negative_sequences.R to obtain a matching negative set of sequences for model training.  
   → If BSgenome is publicly available for the species of interest, it will be automatically downloaded; else it will look in: `../data/BSgenome/`  
   → Home-made BSgenomes used in this study are available in Zenodo: https://zenodo.org/records/18379807

#### Run
```bash
./2_selection_tests/Snakemake/run.Snakemake.sh --sp <species> --sample <sample> [options]
```

Required arguments:
- --sp → species name (must match those in config/params.sh)
- --sample → sample name (used for result subfolders)

Optional arguments (can be passed in any order using --option value):
- --threads → number of threads to allocate (default: 1)
- --system → execution mode: local or SLURM (default: local)
- --baseDir → path to base directory  (default: three levels up from Snakefile)
- --extend_config → Add any Snakemake extended configuration parameters (default: '')
- --dryRun → add to run Snakemake in dry-run mode
- --unlock → add to run Snakemake with the --unlock argument
- --help → display usage and exit


Example:
```bash
./2_selection_tests/run.snakemake.sh --sp human --sample Wilson --threads 10 --dryRun --system SLURM --extend_config TF_source='bed'
```
